Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob and the MG
by Doctor Charles Roseman. He is an Associate Professor
of Evolution, Ecology and Behavior at the University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign. He studies the evolution of
complex traits. And today we're going to talk about
complex traits, how they evolve in in evolution, particularly
focusing on neanderthals and homo sapiens hereditary is differences
between human populations and sex. So, Doctor Roseman, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much for the invitation.
So let's start then with complex traits. So, first
of all, what is a complex trait from an
evolutionary perspective? I mean, what it, it makes the
difference between a complex trait and I guess we
could say a simple rate.
So, uh the the funny thing is that the
complex traits are often simpler than the, the the
simple traits. Um AND that a complex traits are
usually the ones where there are many, many different
genetic and environmental influences that come together either in
combination or in interaction to produce variation in a
trait and the in humans, the canonical complex trait
is height stature. So I'll tell you, I'll tell
you are. And, um, this contrast from what we
think of as simple Mendelian traits. So, uh, the,
the various, uh, things that Mendel was looking at
in his pea plants and that sort of thing,
it turns out that there are not that many
of those simple traits, those Mendelian traits, most of
the traits that we deal with when we're dealing
with organisms in just about any context are complex
in that they have lots and lots and lots
of different influences. Now, complex isn't necessarily a, a
very good word. Uh Complexity is a bit of
a trap because everybody thinks they know what it
is and I haven't heard a satisfactory definition for
it in general. Um So, uh one of the
nice things about complex traits, like stature that is
height and um any of the morphological characteristics that
I tend to study is that they're amenable to
uh kind of a uh a statistical summary approach.
We don't need to know the identity of every
single gene or environmental influence to make statements about
how relatives are going to resemble one another and
to predict how they're going to evolve.
But uh I mean, how do you approach the
study of complex streets? Because I know that particularly
for evolutionarily minded researchers many times the way they
go about things is that they start from an
adaptation is perspective. But uh of course, there are
other mechanisms through which it rates evolve or come
about. Like, for example, sometimes they are by products
or uh how some people call them spend rolls
other times they come about through genetic drift. So
how do you approach their study? Exactly?
OK. So uh the you brought up the adaptation
approach and um well, I think that natural selection
is, is quite important and don't, don't get me
wrong on that. Um I get a little worried
about the adaptation approach. So, and the reason for
that is that uh uh if you are looking
at an organism and you see it doing something
that strikes you as interesting and then you say,
then it must have evolved to do that. Well,
what are you doing? Well, um this is very
similar to the natural theological argument that say William
Paley came up with quite a long time ago.
He was an influence on Darwin. And the idea
is that in his thought experiment, Paley is walking
through a heath and a meadow or, or something
like that and finds a watch and the watch
is complex and it seems to, to track time
and all those sorts of things. And he said
that, well, this is well designed and that means
there must have been a designer. And if you
take natural selection as the designer and put it
into that argument, uh you have only solved a
part of the problem, you've solved the, the deity
problem, the designer problem, the conscious designer problem. But
you haven't solved the evolutionary problem. And the evolutionary
problem is the one where, yeah, we would like
to know something about the uh what did the,
what did the organism start as when we are
interested in the evolution of AAA trait? So we
want to know the ancestral state and then we
want to know the processes, the dynamics that led
up to the characteristic that we're looking at today
or the difference between the organism we're looking at
and the uh and the uh the rest of
the living world. So uh that is um that's
the evolution part. And as you said, that involves
a number of things, recombination. It involves genetic drift.
There might have been gene flow and hybridization. Uh
MUTATION, of course, is very important for keeping variation
around in the first place, all that type of
thing. So, um if we want to do that,
having a dynamical approach is what I would, what
I would say, I'd say evolutionary approach. But uh
you know, that seems to dismiss adaptation as not
being evolutionary and that's not, not really my meaning.
Um And the study of complex traits give that
to you. It gives you a way to formalize
the study of the evolution of complex traits so
that you can build models and test hypotheses about
how things changed uh when they did change.
But so just for the audience to get a
better, a more clear picture picture of what we're
talking about here. Let's say that you uh get
across a complex trait in any kind of species
out there. It might be a behavioral trait or
psychological trait. Uh MORPHOLOGICAL trait. How do you first
approach it study uh theoretically methodologically to really then
understand and know whether it was the result of
natural selection or sometimes specifically sexual selection uh or
if it was the result of something like genetic
drift, or if it's a by-product of certain specific
adaptations.
Ok. Well, the first thing you need to do
is have a good sense of the organism. You
need to know what you're measuring and you need
to have a sense of how the organism is
put together, that includes how it develops so on
and so forth. Let's leave that aside for the
moment. Let's assume that we have that and just
deal with the evolutionary issues. Well, one of the
uh great tools of evolutionary biology is the neutral
theory. And um so this is the idea that
evolution might take place only uh by random genetic
drift and uh random genetic drift. And um the
neutral uh neutral theory of evolution supposes that uh
the circumstance under which evolution is taking place only
because of a random genetic drift and neutral mutations
being put into the population. So these are mutations
that don't affect the survivorship and reproduction of the
organisms. So it's uh they're neutral with respect to
fitness. So no natural selection arises as a result.
So, uh what's nice about that is that it
gives us some clear connections between what molecular variation
ought to look like and what phenotypic variation ought
to look like. So, rather than having a coming
up with a infinitely large series of hypotheses and
models and explanations that feature natural selection which can
operate in all kinds of different ways. This allows
us to write out some very simple expectations under
some uh under uh that are restricted in number
so that, you know, the possibility space is really
small. And what this lets us know is that
uh if we reject the neutral hypothesis or if
another model fits better than the neutral model, then
we have a warrant to go and look deeper,
try to find out if natural selection might have
been operating on something or if there's phenotypic plasticity
that's involved in the variation in the characteristic.
But in your mind, because uh we've mentioned here,
the uh the adaptation is approach, what would you
say are perhaps some of the issues with approaching
the study of uh traits, complex traits or even
simple traits uh with an adaptation is uh approach
in mind that is assuming uh that they must
have been the result of natural selection, sexual selection,
that is that they are adaptations starting with that
assumption. What are, what do you think are the
issues or might be the issues with that.
Well, um so one of the issues is that
there are very, very many ways in which you
can produce exactly the same thing using natural selection.
Uh You can know a lot about the natural
history. You can tell that if say you reject
a neutral hypothesis uh of the evolution of a
characteristic, uh you can still then have very, very
many uh hypotheses about uh what um uh what
natural selection might have done to adapt an organism.
And this is one of the wonderful things about
Darwin's insights and a few other people as well
is that it, it can explain a lot, that's
also its shortcoming. If natural selection explains everything, it
doesn't really explain much of anything. It doesn't allow
us to make the kinds of distinctions that allow
us to uh you know, uh talk about the
dynamics, what's or come up with plausible alternatives. It's
also an empirical issue. Um uh YOU know, the,
and this is where there's a difference between the
study of humans, what makes humans unique, which is
one instance and the study of say how body
size and brain size evolve together, that involves a
comparative study of lots and lots of organisms as
opposed to just looking at one organism. And the,
the general trends that you might see across, across
vertebrates, across mammals, across whatever uh may give you
a sense of what tends to drive the evolution
of any one of these features. But the, it
doesn't necessarily give you a indicator of what drove
any one transition. So, you know, we could have
a very, very clear picture from comparative studies about
what's going on with the evolutions of, of brains
or bodies or whatever and still not have much
of an idea for what is going on with
humans. And we have conspicuously large brains uh that
evolved over, you know, let's say the last 2
million years or so, it's the important bit. And
uh I don't think that there are very many
satisfactory adaptations explanations, even though we're really pretty sure
from another in a number of angles that uh
that natural selection was probably involved. Um It's just
that, you know, and everybody is coming up with
these accounts that propose functions that might relate to
fitness, but we don't really have a uh uh
a good reason to believe many of the stories
over a lot of the other stories. So the
dynamical account is, is quite good in that you
can understand the evolution of something without necessarily understanding
the function. And that's important because there have been
very, very few studies that actually relate what uh
you know, what a morphological characteristic does uh in
the functional biology of an organism to the fitness
of the organism. And then put that in the
context of genetic variation in all of those parts
to describe how it might change. So, uh uh
and that, that is a, um, I'm not saying
it's a, we should expect that of every study.
That's the ideal study that would be absolutely wonderful
to have. But it's certainly beyond the reach. But
it's worth knowing that, uh, that there are serious
limitations that come from the, uh, perspective where you
see something, it seems to do something really well
and it must have evolved for that function that,
that doesn't get you as close to a satisfactory
answer as you might think.
Do you think that perhaps one of the specific
risks here is that if people start from an
adaptation perspective, that they are more prone to developing
what some people call just so stories about the
evolution and the origins and the development of any
specific trait. Because I would imagine that trying to
uh assume that because a particular trait is there,
then it's because it might uh it probably increased
uh fitness for the organism or the whatever kind
of species we're talking about perhaps makes people more
prone to trying to come up with stories for
why that link is supposedly there or not?
Yeah. Um So the uh I, I think that
is, that is true. If you don't take the
uh dynamic of evolution, if you don't take the
evolutionary history into account, uh then you are prone
to just telling a just so story. I don't
think that's nearly as common as a lot of
people would have us believe certainly not in evolutionary
biology, maybe in some other corners of the world.
But um the, the dynamic approach, the sort of
the evolutionary genetic approach, the the complex trait approach
allows you to do a number of other things.
So, one of the things that, uh you know,
if, if we talk about brain size, um you
know, it becomes cons conspicuously large in humans over
the last 2 million years, it was proper natural
selection, driving it along with a few other things.
And um uh most of the models don't believe
it was brain size itself. So, you know, it's
the capacities for certain kinds of behavior, certain kinds
of cognitive uh abilities and so on and so
forth that are supposedly drove it. So what we're
looking at is a correlated response or under this,
under this model would be a correlated response to
natural selection on something else. Now, that happens when
you have a genetic correlation between characteristics, natural selection
works on one, it changes the frequencies of the
alleles that are involved in that one trait. But
those, those uh loci where those uh genetic variants
I should say are um uh those loci, those
places in the genome also affect the other trait.
And so the other trait gets dragged along with
it. So you can have strong natural selection on
something else and it can also cause a change
in whatever you happen to be looking at. Now,
um This this raises a problem because that there
are many, many ways in which to measure an
organism and the natural selection can behave in all
kinds of very strange ways. So you very infrequently,
you very, very infrequently think that, um, or are
justified in thinking that you're actually measuring the thing
that is important for driving the fitness differences that
make natural selection. Ok. So that's one thing we
could talk about correlated responses. There's always the problem.
Um Not a problem. There are always the possibility
that you're looking at phenotypic plasticity. So uh the
same genotype, if you raise an organism with the
same genotype under different circumstances, you may end up
with a rather different phenotype depending on the environmental
conditions. Uh THAT that happens quite a bit. Um
And then there is also the feature of organisms.
Uh Well, if you, if you look at complex
multicellular organisms like us, and uh there's, you look
at our genomes, eukaryotic genomes, they're very messy places.
Uh The, the the genome is uniquely inappropriately named
for eukaryotes because almost nothing in it is a
is, is a gene. It's a very, very small
percentage is actually a gene. And there are all
these repeated elements and transpo elements and retroviral inserts
and any number of other things that go on.
And um so, uh and this is the grounds
for a, a lot of natural selection at a
different level that we don't necessarily appreciate when we're
looking at or at, at full organisms. But also
what's interesting about it is that uh you know,
why is there all that slop in the genome?
It takes forever for us to replicate cells? It's
just incredibly energetically expensive bacteria are just the epitome
of efficiency by comparison. So how does that work
out? Shouldn't natural selection be getting rid of all
of this uh the slop in the system, all
this waste of energy. And um if you think
about bacteria versus humans, uh one notable thing about
bacteria is that there are a lot more bacteria
than there are humans, a lot more bacteria than
there are humans on you right now or on
me right now. And uh what this means is
that the effect of random genetic drift, just those
random changes because of sampling in the in populations
very, very practically negligible in bacteria, but profound in
organisms like us or mice or, or mushrooms or
whatever. And what this means is that natural selection
is only so efficient, it's only so good up
to a point and we have to leave room
for that in the model. Uh Because uh the
genetic drift is is ubiquitous and there are lots
and lots of things out there that seem quite
mysterious until you think uh natural selection just isn't
that powerful.
So to try to illustrate all of this with
an example, you've already mentioned a couple of times
there, the evolution of the cranium in hominids, uh
tell us a little bit more about that. And
I know that you've done work, for example, on
the evolutionary path to the genus Homo, that is
the transition from Aus uh Australopithecus to Homo. Uh
And you've done work specifically on the evolution of
the cranium. So, could you tell us about that?
What did you find then in terms of these
different mechanisms uh that make for a trade to
evolve or to develop? How do they apply here?
I mean, the evolution of the Ukrainian, the uranium
as far as we know, has been mostly the
result of natural selection or any other mechanism that
we talked about here? Yeah. So
um the early part of the human, of human
evolution and the work that I did on that
the Australopithecus leading up to Homo and then uh
later on in the Pleistocene, uh most of that
work was done by um Lauren Schroeder and, and
Becky Ackerman. And I was, I was uh helping
out with some of that. But um later on
when we're talking about human variation today, that's where
my uh expertise is. Yeah, and that's where I've
been focused. Now, I, I talked about brain size
getting bigger and I talked about how natural selection
was probably involved. And I, I mean, probably in
the scientific sense in which I'd be very, very,
very surprised if it wasn't. Um Yeah, but uh
the rest of it, the, the morphology of your
face, uh the morphology of parts of your cranial
base, the which uh the part of your skull,
that breasts on top of your, of your spine.
Um, A lot of that looks to be quite
neutral. That is, it doesn't seem to affect fitness
or hadn't affected fit fitness. And, uh, we know
this for a couple of reasons I mentioned earlier
that there is a nice relationship between genomic variation
and phenotypic variation. If nothing interesting is happening. So
if it's only random genetic drift, then uh we
expect a certain kind of relationship between the phenotypic
variation and the molecular variation genomic variation. And we
see that in human populations today with some exceptions
here and there, you know, there's natural selection is
apparent in some places. What drove that natural selection
is a total mystery. Now, what's interesting about this
is that uh human cranial form, outside the outside
brain side has evolved very, very quickly, very high
evolutionary rates over longish uh spans of time. And
this is in comparison to other mammals and the
rates themselves look quite neutral. So, uh you know,
uh this is awfully corny. But I'd like to
say if, uh you know, if we're made in
the image of God, then God played dice because
most of our, our, our, our visages is uh
sort of cobbled together randomly. And uh this is
not to say that, you know, and um you
know, when I was first proposing this, I, I
was not the first to propose this, but I
was one of the first to link it up
with the genomic variation to bring it along. There
was a lot of pushback because a lot of
people had their adaptation of stories or their stories
about plasticity that they quite liked. And um they
didn't really care for the idea that uh it
was just lots and lots of random changes. So,
um that's, I guess an example, getting back to
the hazards of adaptation is that if you have
tons and tons and tons of anthropologists looking at
very, very few fossils, everybody is going to want
to find something. And it's sort of the, the
worst degrees of freedom problem. You could possibly imagine
um you know, more researchers than there are objects
of study. And uh and that, that can be
j strike in uh in fundamental ways. And I
think that was an example of it.
So at least at this point according to the
best evidence we have and the way you read
it, you would say that uh most of the
morphology of our uranium was the result of random
processes and not something like adaptation or phenotypic plasticity
is that it?
Yeah. Yeah. There, there, there are secondary effects of
both adaptation and, and foy plasticity. Um I'd say
that we can say the natural selection happened. I
don't know how adaptive it was. That's a distinction
that we have to bear in mind. Um So,
uh, you know, uh David Cates and Noreen, Von
Kramon Th Bell and a few other people have
done these, uh quite uh interesting studies where they,
um take a comparative approach and they're able to
test hypotheses about what happens when you do say
a transition from hunting and gathering to um to,
to farming. What happens to the skeleton in that
kind of a context and uh they're able to
do it controlling for the evolutionary history behind it
and you could discover it, they found the effects
of plasticity kind of small in comparison to the
old arguments, but they're, they're pretty robust findings because
they're done in this process informed comparative framework.
And so could you tell us about the differences
uh at the level of the cranium between neanderthals
and homo sapiens? What are the main differences we
find there? And, uh, I mean, what kinds of
information can we get from that? Can we get,
for example, any possible information about uh differences in
terms of their brains, for example, or not really?
Well. Um
I, I don't know a whole lot about how
to uh recover information about brain structure from, uh
the uh from fossils. And there are certainly people
out there who do it and I, I can't
really comment on it. Uh, um, uh AT a,
at a professional level, what I can say is
that the differences between humans today and neanderthals um
are are largely neutral, uh quite strikingly. So, and
the rate of evolution between uh neanderthals and humans
uh today is the same or give or take
a little tiny bit as the very quick evolution
among different groups of humans today. So we're just
looking at a extension of the same dynamic going
back in time. And um you know, it uh
it's, it, it seems to scale linearly with time.
It's a or properly scaled, it scales linearly with
time. It's a um uh it, it's, it's really
quite fascinating and unusual. So there were lots and
lots and lots of adaptive explanations for uh differences
between neanderthals and humans that had to do with
adaptation to one thing or another or plasticity because
neanderthals uh a characteristic tooth wear that indicates that
they chewed on things maybe s while they were
processing them or something like that. And um yeah,
and the, the, and that made their uh that
made a plastic response to their uh to their
behaviors. Uh I think that a lot of these
stories are, um you know, it's not to say
that they aren't true. Some of them might be,
it's just the evidence for them is, is, is
weakened by quite a bit. Um So a lot
of it looks quite random and I should say
that that is unusual for mammals. Uh Mammals typically
don't have that very rapid evolutionary uh rates that
look like random genetic drift. Over very long periods
of time
and, and do we have any idea why that's
the case? I mean, what would have been the
forces or factors playing a role there? Do, do
we know anything about it?
Yeah. Um, WELL, uh, that's a, it's a, it's
a very, very difficult question and, uh, in 20
years of thinking about it, I don't think that
I've come up with a satisfactory answer for it.
Uh, Typically, if you, so if I were to
reach back into the literature, it might be um
that there's something about humans uh using technology, tradition,
culture, whatever to uh to modify our environments, such
that we don't end up with um uh with
natural selection, affecting the bodily form nearly as much
as you as you might expect in other organisms.
But that's, I'd, I'd file that under speculation. Um
It's a, it's a little difficult, you know, it's
hard to tell what natural selection is doing when
it's doing it. It's hard harder still to say
why natural selection isn't doing something. Um So that's
uh the, you know, occasionally we have to be
content with ignorance and, and uh wait for more,
more findings. And I'd, I'd say that's where this
is. Mhm
And another thing we haven't talked about yet here
has to do with gene ex change between species.
Uh Yes, something like hybridization occurred a lot during
human evolution. And if so, what do we know
about it? And its potential effects. Yes. So this
is,
uh, something that, uh, Becky Ackerman at the University
of Cape Town has done quite a bit of
work on and the extent to which I've done
work on it has been connected with her work.
And, uh, of course, this is something that is
very popular among the paleo genomics people and they
can address those topics much, much better than I
can. The, um, it's clear that say uh different
differentiated groups of humans have hybridized. Um It doesn't
appear to be a gene flow that's sort of
constantly going back and forth between regions uh at
a very low level through time. It seems like
there are episodic uh sort of events in which
hybridization might take place. Now, that's interesting because many
people living today carry with them, a Neanderthal component
or a denisovan component uh of, of their, of
their genomes. Uh THAT might uh in some cases
have something to do with uh with how they've
been able to adapt to certain environments, uh might
have something to do with your immune function. That
that is uh that sort of thing is very
much in its infancy uh or figuring out exactly
what that does. And one of the reasons why
that's a difficult problem to deal with is that
uh when you deal with organisms that have evolved
separately for a while and then come back together,
you end up with something called heterosis where the
expectation for the hybrid offspring is not sort of
an average of the parents or anything like that.
It's, it's somewhere else. And um that is very,
very difficult to get a handle on because it
involves uh interactions involves uh dominant and recessive uh
effects at, at various losi uh in the genome.
And then what are called epis static effects the
interactions among different parts of the genome. So if
you shuffle up two genomes and throw them together,
you can end up with uh things, changing their
functions in really radical and unpredictable ways. Now, this
is interesting because you, you, you display a whole
new way of generating variation. And that might be
interesting for our uh for uh telling us about
how organisms are human organisms in the past, uh
did respond to natural selection and how they might
have adapted. But it's um um that, that's a
very difficult problem.
So, changing topics. Now, I know that you're very
interested and you've written a lot about this uh
very interested in the debate between the so-called hereditary
and the anti hereditary. So, uh I mean, just
to first frame the debate, could you tell us
what the debate is really about? And what are
the main points of contention here when it comes
to understanding uh differences between human populations or differences
between people that have different ancestries.
So, uh starting with a hereditary position, um I'd
say that the hereditary position is that uh there
are uh biological races of humans. So, race as
we might experience it today is not necessarily a
uh a, a artifact of a social process. It's,
it, it reflects evolutionary processes over deep time, evolutionary
time. So that's the first thing. Um And you
can organize people into these races based on their
characteristics and ancestry and so on and so forth.
That's the first claim. So the second claim is
that um those groups differ um And uh those,
uh and the third claim is that those groups
uh differ in ways that are not just environmental,
there is also a evolved genetic component. Two. And
um so the uh uh the response to that
is pretty highly varied across uh academia and that
there are certainly social scientists who don't want anything
to do with genetics. They immediately think it's eugenics
and they uh leave the conversation right away. Um
uh I don't uh they tend not to like
me, not to like me as much as they
uh you know, dislike the hereditary. So, you know,
we're in the same boat together in that, in
a lot of ways. Uh The, the main things
boil down to uh are races, biological categories that
is evolved categories that we can attribute to processes
acting over deep time or are they uh social
uh constructions in the product of the social dynamics?
And what do differences mean? And what does it
mean to be a genetic difference or an evolved
difference between the two and so this uh uh
now I, I study genetic differences between groups of
humans. So, am I hereditary? No. Um The reasons
I'm not a hereditary uh would be that I
don't think that race is a deep evolved biological
feature of humankind. Um And I also think that
the hereditary perspective on genetics relies on a set
of popular misconceptions about what genetics is. So, um
and this, this relates to genetic determinism in one
way or another, uh a very specific flavor of
it where if you see a genetic difference in
one context, that must necessarily mean that it, it,
it, it will manifest itself in all other contexts.
So what this means is that, um you know,
I might say that, OK, well, there's a difference
here. Um Let's say it's something we care about.
Um Let's say that we change the circumstances. We
might end up with a situation in which the
differences are flip flop. We might end up in
a situation where they are uh completely ameliorated, we
don't know. Um WHEREAS a hereditary would say that
these differences are driving the social outcome differences that
we see in society today. And um you know,
so uh I guess that when it comes to
the question about biological race and uh and um
whether race is a social destruction or not. Um
uh Well, uh I think that, I think that
you might have something to ask about that a
little later. So it's uh you just go ahead
from
there. Yeah, let me just clarify one point there
when you mentioned genetic determinism. What that means exactly
is that whenever people endorse a view that goes
along, uh or that falls under the umbrella, let's
say of genetic determinism, they are making a claim
that uh a particular trait is the result of
whatever set of genes and it is mostly or
uh completely impermeable to environmental influences is that it,
yeah, in, in sensitivity to changes in environmental context.
So and the uh and then as a set
of it's, it's a very diffuse type of thing.
Um uh AND uh it, the lack of clarity
uh leaves a lot of room for mischief, but
that's, that's the core of it.
So also perhaps to illustrate these, uh of course,
there are many trades out there that people make
claims about threats where uh I mean, some of
them are clear differences that we find between people
of different ancestries, others are disputed. And of course,
one of the most disputed ones has to do
with intelligence and IQ. So uh there are people,
people that argue very strongly for IQ being mostly
genetically determined and for uh clear differences in IQ
between different races, for example, between whites and blacks
in America, between Jews and Europeans, between Jews and
East Asians, et cetera, et cetera. So, what do
you make of that, I mean, because the, there
are several different aspects to this argument that we
can tackle it. But generally speaking, what do you
make of, uh, the arguments put forth by people
who argue that first of all IQ is mostly
genetically based and second that differences in IQ between,
uh, human groups or population are mostly explained by
genetic differences.
Yeah. So, um, the first thing that I'd say
is that they're, they're really not doing any research
into that front that they come at you with
tables of numbers and, you know, they're relying on,
uh, a, uh, I shouldn't say they're relying on,
uh, the, the arguments get shaped by people's impressions
of what's being delivered to them. And, uh for
instance, there's lots of arguments about her heritability, which
is the proportion of uh variation in a population
with respect to a trait that is attributable to
genetic effects as opposed to environmental effects. And heritability
just doesn't tell you anything in and of itself
about how uh malleable or plastic a trait might
be. Ok. So, it just did, you know, you,
we could write the math out and there's just
absolutely nothing there. The within group heritability doesn't tell
you anything about the, between group heritability unless you
add in some actual evolutionary theory that tells you
how you got the differences between the groups in
the first place. Now, hereditary ins don't do that.
They, uh will, uh, they don't have the evolutionary
component to that argument. So they can't tell me
how, um how strong natural selection is, was when
they can't tell me any of these types of
things. We're not proposing any evolutionary argument. They're just
saying these numbers are different now. Uh And that's
true. The number 100 is different from the number
85 but that's not terribly interesting. So, towards the
beginning of our discussion, I talked about how you
really need to know the organism and um educational
attainment and uh cognitive ability. IQ whatever you want
to talk about it behaves very strangely as a
complex trait. Now that we've had genome wide association
studies coming in. Uh It's the, the uh the
difference between the estimates of the effective genetics from
the genome wide association studies where you just go
through and count up everything that looks like it
has an effect on the trait, compile them. And
uh you come up with a summary statistic of
how much variation you can account for. Um uh
THAT tends to be very small, especially when you
get rid statistically control for a lot of the
tendency for uh different things to be inherited together
in humans that aren't strictly speaking inheritable. So your
economic situation, your uh uh what hap what area
you happen to live in, uh what your family
is like and so on and so forth. It's
very, very attenuated. Um And it's rather different than
looking at something like height or something like, uh,
uh even body mass or something like that is
something very different going on. And the hereditary seem
to be wedded to their old twin estimates which,
you know, uh people in evolutionary biology don't take
very seriously and we, we tend not to use
mostly because a lot of organisms don't display twins.
But even in cattle where you do have regular
twinning, people don't go out of their way to
find the twins because they know that the estimates
tend to be bad. That is the estimates of
the effects of, of genes on variation that you
get from comparing twins or, or just upwardly biased
in a big way. Ok. So, um so what
I say is that uh the hereditary ins claim
that they're arguing for, they're making an evolutionary argument
for differences among groups, but there's no evolution there,
the genetics are pointed in the wrong direction. They're
not looking at the right issuess. Uh It really
is a just a collection of summary statistics of
dubious quality that uh they get thrown out there.
And um you know, the between group heritability versus
within group heritability discussion is a prime example that
um there, there's no relationship between those two quantities
unless you add in some evolutionary theory, which the
hereditary ins refuse to do. And hereditary ins like
to use between group heritability and within group heritability
to figure out how plausible a difference between groups
might be if it were entirely environmental and there's
a pretty basic algebra errors in it and it
just keeps on going through the literature. So, um,
the, you know, the main problem with hereditary is,
is not that, uh, you know, the other problems
with it, but when we speak about it scientifically,
uh is that it's just not there, they're not
making the relevant arguments. They're not producing science that
we would, uh, that we would understand as being
informed by modern evolutionary biology. Um Now, with their
motivations are their own, I don't, I don't read
minds. I, I don't pretend to uh be able
to peer into the, their souls or that sort
of thing. I can say that they're not doing
the science that they claim to be doing.
And, and I, I mean, if you will allow
me and uh uh please uh comment on what
I'm about to say. I mean, even when it
comes to just the science because of course, let's
try to leave motivations and politics aside here just
focusing on the science, even when it comes to
uh trying to, I, I mean, extrapolate from within
group heritability to between group heritability, even if someone
takes uh very seriously, for example, the work done
in behavioral genetics when it comes to studying twins,
adopted kids, adopted people, et cetera. Uh I mean,
even the behavioral geneticists themselves say, and I know
this because I've talked with people like Robert plumbing
for the show and others, they say that uh
their methodologies, the work they do does not allow
for someone to act to do that kind of
extrapolation. I mean, they're studying within group heritability within
group differences between people that are part of the
group. They're studying in a particular environment. They uh
they, for example, Robert Loman told me that, for
example, it doesn't allow for us to really study
very well, differences between men and women, between different
groups of people, between different races if you want.
And also when it comes to the databases, many
times, hereditary point to when talking about or making
claims about differences in IQ between uh people from
Africa and people from Europe. Just to give an
example, those databases are extremely poor and they are
based on an extremely small sample. And I would
add convenient sample, convenient for the narrative that they
are putting forth uh particularly when it comes to
the samples from Africa. I mean, they are extremely
limited and extremely small number of people and we
can't really tell anything from those data. Scientific. Right.
Yeah. And uh behavioral, the point about the behavioral
genetics is is important in that um there's really
nothing evolutionary about behavioral genetics as it's practiced. Uh
This may sound a little strange but um you
need the extra theoretical evolutionary component to relate within
group heritability to between group heritability. And that's simply
not appearing either in behavioral genetics because it's not
really the point of the field, it's not appearing
in the hereditary literature because they don't appear to
be all that interested in, in evolution. So. Mhm.
And then another thing that I read about in
your work and now focusing more on the anti
reds, you say in one of your papers that
uh they bring to the table arguments based on
complexity and a demand for a mechanistic as opposed
to variational explanations. Could, could you explain uh the
argument you're making there and why that might be
an issue that they're using those kinds of arguments?
Yes. So, um, anti hereditary are against hereditary is,
um uh that's about all that unifies anti hereditary.
Uh There were lots and lots and lots of
different flavors. So, um there, uh and that I,
I the paper is not about sort of groups
of her. It's anti hereditary. It's more about the
different flavors of argument that I find objectionable. Um
And uh in terms of the wanting a causal
mechanistic explanation of what's going on. They usually mean
they want to know what genes are involved and
they want to know what the protein products of
those genes are doing and what the metabolism is,
is doing and so on and so forth. And,
um uh that's sort of, besides the point because
we, um just as a matter of fact, we
can do quite a bit of evolution without knowing
the, uh or you can do a lot of
evolutionary biology without knowing the uh uh the mechanistic
basics, we can use quantitative genetics. We can use
those elegant simplicities that come out of the bewildering
complexity of the genotype phenotype map. It's, you know,
and uh this is where a lot of statistics
come from in the first place, you know, you
have to do it very, very carefully. That's true.
Uh Now, what's interesting about this is that, that
demand for mechanism, that demand for uh this very
highly reduced account of what is going on is
kind of a uh expression of, of the bad
habit that they attribute to hereditary. Its, they call
them reductionist, they call them determinist. And what they're
doing is they're saying, yes, we agree with you
that genetics is deterministic and reductionistic. We agree with
hereditary ins on that. Uh And we want more
of it. We just don't have enough of it.
And so, you know, the, the correct answer for,
uh when somebody says some characteristic is uh exh
heritable. And I'm going to talk about the social
poli, political, social and political ramifications of that is
to say, you know, you, you're dealing with the
wrong statistic. That's not gonna tell you anything. It's
not to say I want to see the genes
because that goes that, that is a validation of
the same kind of determinism and reductionism that anti
hereditary ins complain about in hereditary complexity is another
thing. Um I think I mentioned at the beginning
of a discussion that uh complexity is a, is
awfully convenient, uh, rhetorical trick to hide behind. And
that you, you can say just about anything is,
is bafflingly complex. And people seem to like to
hear that that's, that plays well with a certain
kind of audience. Um It really explains nothing and
uh if you know, if it's, you know, if
it's complex is the answer, you know, what's the
question? And at a practical level, uh to tell
that something is complex, takes quite a lot of
data sometimes and those are data that we just
don't have in a lot of con context. Um,
YOU need to be able to find some signal
in a system that looks very noisy. And this
is one of the problems is that if you
don't have that variational sense going in, you don't
have that statistical sense, you can take any random
set of data and concoct a very, very convincing
story about it. And we, um, lots and lots
of stories about how people, uh get, uh sucked
into gambling addictions and so on and so forth
because they're absolutely convinced that they have a system,
they see through the complexity, they can apprehend it
and they can manipulate it and they are absolutely
wrong. So it's a kind of a dangerous rhetorical
device because on one hand you, uh you, uh,
it, it, you, you're saying somehow, uh, well, we
can't really know what's going on. Uh, BUT I
can see that something that somebody else can't, it's,
it's a, it turns you into an oracle and
people tend to tend to be attracted to that
when they're charismatic enough and so on and so
forth. But, um, it really doesn't explain a whole
lot and it comes with the danger of telling
stories about noise to that. Those would be the,
my complaints and, you know, II I think that
one of the problems with anti hereditary is, is
both a tendency to say everything is complex to
the point where uh you can't have a theory
about anything. Theories involve simplifications, theories involve abstractions, they
evolve, involve generalizations. Um And if everything is so
complex that you can't have any of those, you
have no theory, you don't have the possibility of
science. And uh and it's, it just seems to
be a uh uh it, it's a non answers
to a non question. It's just a, it's just
a statement for statements sake, a rhetorical trick.
Mhm So uh just to ask you about this
point directly, how do you think we should think
about the role of genes and their potential causal
power when it comes to uh understanding differences between
human population?
So uh in terms of their causal power? Well,
so the first thing to remember is that genes
are parts of organisms. And um we want to
get to know the organism as, as biologists as
anthropologists, as social scientists or humanists in general. And
we need to have some sense about what the
context in which those genes are operating is like.
Um And what we can say is that care
in carefully controlled settings uh where we have the,
the right uh study design, they're, they're usually epidemiological
rather than experimental. And if they're experimental in humans,
you probably shouldn't be doing them. Um You have
a uh you can come up to the conclusion
that substituting this very variant of the gene for
another in this context will cause this change. All
right. So, and this goes back to R A
Fisher's uh idea of causation. What happens if not,
what happens under the counterfactual situation. Now, the problem
is is that we don't know what the organism
is like across all sorts of uh the uh
uh all sorts of the of possible environments in
which you could find yourself. And a really good
example of this is uh the use of genomics
for medical purposes. The whole point of that is
to basically people look for drug targets. They're looking
for things that they can add a chemical to
you and they will, they will fix you and
then probably make a whole bunch of side effects
that they can make drugs to treat. It's a,
it's a, it's a great business model. Um But
the uh you know, the, the whole point behind
uh genomics, pharmacogenomics medical genomics is to use properties
of the organisms to find environments. That is a
new chemical that you ingest to change a life
outcome. So it's a search for environmental possibility. It's
not a statement about genetic determination and the way
that I take that is that if we're interested
in other characteristics that uh you know, behavioral characteristics
or morphological characteristics, um we really need to have
a sense of what the organism might do in
other circumstances. And humans have a bad track record
of, of conforming to our expectations. So, um I
would say that it's very, very difficult beyond certain
well known systems to say what will happen. You
know, if you completely lack a re uh the
ability to digest something past a certain age, you
know, the lactose and uh val absorption and into
adulthood or the lactase persistence into adulthood. Um Then,
you know, you have a pretty good idea of
what environments in which you might face problems if
you don't produce lactase as an adult, that is
the enzyme that breaks down lactose. Um And you
also know what to do about it with cultural
innovations, like uh a um a pill with a,
a bunch of enzymes in it. So, um the
uh it's, it's very, very difficult to go from
a uh very general property of an organism to
a statement about what they're going to do in,
in general. Now, this is not to say, you
know, you that there are going to be very,
very general things that you need to uh be,
be aware of. We need water, we need proper
shelter. Can't be too hot, can't be too cold,
so on and so forth. Um But those are
very generic properties of organisms that are tailored a
little bit to humans but not so much. Um
So it's extremely difficult to say that um there's
a uh that there are genetic differences in the
first place. Then it's very difficult to find the
causal mechanisms. It's very difficult to predict what they're
going to do across context. So at that point,
um you know, you can have an evolved difference
between two groups and you can change the environment
and then that might completely reorder or entirely disappear.
So that is something that you're uh that it's
a, is a profound challenge for all of biology
and anthropology and it's not something that you get
at with heritage estimates or even GW, it's quite
a bit more going on. Sorry for the vague
answer. That was
uh no, no, no, no, no worries at all.
I, I was just going to say, I, and
I guess that probably this point would also apply
to the medical field, isn't, isn't it also? I
mean, a little bit limiting and perhaps in a
sense worrying that many times we are making some
influences when it comes to, for example, thinking about
races just on the basis of uh skin color.
I mean, because for example, in the medical field,
I know that there are populations in Africa where
people are more susceptible to developing fals form anemia.
But, uh, ii, I mean, if you're assuming, for
example, in the medical field that just because someone
has a, a darker skin color that they have
some African ancestry, that they would be more, potentially
more susceptible to that kind of disease. I mean,
you, you might miss, uh, a lot in terms
of diagnosis because the skin color itself does just
by itself doesn't tell you much about even the
subpopulation in Africa where the ancestry of that person
might have come from. Right. I, I mean, does
this make sense or?
Yes. Yeah. So, um, this, uh, using race as
a diagnostic category, ha in medicine as a, uh,
uh, a long and not, not terribly useful history,
uh, it's, uh, you know, oftentimes quite shocking what
happens and, um, and the point there that you're
making, uh, is that, uh, uh, the, the correlations
between different characteristics at different levels may be different.
So, at the worldwide level, it may be quite
different than it is at the local level. You
know, Simpsons paradox, that sort of thing. And, uh,
they're very seldom good enough to have a very
strong indicator of what based on one property of
an individual, what else they might be, uh, might,
might be likely to present as a symptom or
as a as a susceptibility or, or something along
those lines. So, yeah, um that is a um
it's a persistent worry. Um And this is kind
of where the difficulty with uh talking about uh
either race as an evolved category or race as
a social construct comes into things because um race
is a social construction. Uh That's not a very
informative thing. It's kind of like saying adaptation comes
from natural selection. It's a such a broad explanatory
uh uh tool that it, you know, you really
need to refine it. So the question I like
to approach is uh I, I like to say
that, well, you know, uh race as, as we
understand, it isn't a terribly uh it isn't a
deep evolutionary phenomenon. We know that because race models
don't predict human variation at all. Well, um so
a lot of the principal components analysis plots that
you see floating around on the internet where you've
got brightly colored patches of, of peoples. Um uh
The, the, you know, the problem with principal components
analysis is that it's not an analysis, it's a
depiction and people are just sort of painting race
onto it as they see fit. Um And you'll
see clustering algorithms going around. Well, it turns out
that they miss so much of the variation even
between groups that uh that you need much better
uh models that don't include race that include much
more complex structures. And I could say complex legitimately
because we have the data and to test with
the complexity and we, we can see that. Um
SO racism doesn't explain the evolution of humans. We
cannot say that uh humans come in these deep
evolved races. Mhm Talk about today. Well, race is
a very real part of our everyday experiences in
United States. Um Certainly in, in Portugal and uh
your experience in in Portugal and my experience in
the United States are going to be rather different.
They are going to be some commonalities that's for
certain. But who gets counted as what and how
the dynamic works out can be very different? Mhm
Bye bye. Now, the question then becomes uh if
races are social constructions and they're driven by uh
these political processes, if racism is what's sort of
shaping and, and reinforcing them, why do you see
genetic differences between groups? So I, I'd like to
ask it's very simple answer. Uh OR very, very
simple question I should say. Um uh Where did,
where did you get your jeans?
Where did I get my gym? I guess that
from my parents,
right. Great. OK. Yeah, perfect. Where did you get
your parents
from? My grandparents?
Well, not really. They, they kind of had to
go through a social milieu to end up meeting
and then producing
it. Uh Yeah. Yeah, that
and you know, uh there are lots of social
factors that go into that. So, you know, uh
and that is one of the things that uh
one of the ways in which you do get
obvious genetic differences between groups of humans that we
call races that are social constructions. So the way
I like to put it is that um you
know, the genome, you know, a collection of genes
that typifies any organism that's not a social construction,
but my genome and your genome are quite literally
social constructions because of the ways in which parents
need to reproduce. So, um if uh the what
this does is this way of thinking about things
and this is not original to me, Ashley Montague,
who's a anthropologist, talked about this a whole bunch
of people a long time ago whose work has
been forgotten about, talk about this. But the very
act of reproduction in a society is heavily influenced
by various social dynamics. Racism is one of them,
class is a big deal in terms of who,
who gets to marry one another. So, so the
very act of reproduction in humans is socially mediated
in important ways by race and racism by class
and uh class snobbery and, and various things like
that. So you end up with a situation where
uh we have to think about the ways in
which our histories as a uh as, as, as
societies, not just our prehistory uh as, as human
beings uh or as organisms um shape the variation
that we see in societies. And that's a, that's
a little bit unsettling for people in a lot
of ways. But, um, and I don't think that
we really know how to talk about that. Uh,
VERY well. There are some social scientists who are
starting to talk about it and, um, they'd be
much better at it than I would, uh, my,
my ability to deal with some of the subtleties
and nuances, uh, limited and, um, I'm certainly not
a historian. So, uh, but this is one of
the problems with the humanity scientific divide so much
pushback against anything that mentions genetics in the humanities.
And people in the sciences tend to look down
on the, on the uh humanities uh in ways
that are, you know, uh sort of mean and,
and not at all productive, but that we want
to understand it. That's what we have to, that's
what we have to understand.
So, uh uh I mean, just to close off
the section on uh the topic of race. So
would you say then that race, even though it
is not a scientifically valued concept from the perspective
of genetics, biology and anthropology, if we're talking about
humans, of course, it is um something that we
can talk about scientifically, I guess from uh from
the perspective of sociology, cultural anthropology and other disciplines
like that, because it's very much a social category
that we use across the societies and that clearly
has a real effect on people's uh sociality, how
we relate to one another. There sometimes uh even
effects on their, on how they reproduce with whom
they reproduce and, and so on. Right. So it
is a scientifically valid concept. But uh when approached
this way,
yeah, I, I would say that we need a
new way of doing science to approach it. The
way science got set up means that this kind
of fall the the issue falls into the cracks,
the issue of human organisms as social beings uh
is very, very difficult to get across. And you
know, there are whole swans of the humanities who
will talk about bodies, but they're not talking about
actual bodies. It's a very abstract notion, the actual
uh body that to, you know, manifest hunger and
desire and, and pain and whatnot doesn't seem to
enter into the discourse on bodies. And then you
end up with uh the sciences who kind of
ignore a lot of the messiness of, of, of
society. So a new kind of science needs to
be developed to deal with that. And it's the
type of thing where uh disciplines as they evolved
in in academia just aren't well suited to doing
it.
Mhm So of course, when we earlier talked about
the hereditary, we mentioned things like uh in intelligence
like you and we were focusing mostly and that's
also uh also the, the reason for that is
the fact that many times they also tend to
focus on more psychological behavioral traits than really uh
more anatomical physical traits. But when it comes to
body form, what do we know about the main
factors that play a role in its variation among
human populations?
Um Not nearly as much as we think we
did. So, uh I, I think that if we're
dealing with uh issues of um what I'll call
the body form composition or body composition, um The
things that go along with the rules that are
supposed to uh match mammals to their environments based
on how the prevailing temperature. So Bergman's law and
Alan's Law having to do with how sort of
big and round you are. Um YOU know, or
how, how long your limbs are and things like
that. Um Now, in humans, you do see a
bit of that. Uh It's quite a bit of,
it is not attributable to natural selection. Uh So
it doesn't appear to be an adaptation. Uh There
is a sort of incidental correlation that arises from
the way that uh that uh human variation was
set up in the last 50,000, 60,000, 100,000 years
and, and latitude so that you end up with
a correlation, a correlation is highly diminished when you
control for the fact that human groups are related
to one another. Now, there's also the, there are
also some issues of um how differences in nutrition
and differences in uh consumption of different foodstuffs or,
or whether you tend to face uh uh food
scarcity at different points in uh in time in
different environments um that affects growth in, in a
number of different ways that can affect body form.
So you see interesting secular changes uh as societies
uh end up with more secure food supplies and,
and uh different kinds of food often types. So,
uh stature is a wonderful example of that. Over
the past 100 years, many, many different societies have
grown uh many centimeters in height as uh as
diets have changed as you end up with, uh
you know, uh waterborne diseases are taken out of
the equation by sewer systems, things like that.
And actually we saw the opposite when humans adopted
agriculture, right? I mean, our uh the height diminished
for po I mean, comparing to, for example, Foragers
center gatherers, the people who lived in societies initially
that were uh based on agriculture looking at their
skeletons, they, their height was reduced.
Yes. Um THAT uh again, this is sort of
beyond my expertise and there are a whole batch
of new papers there that deal with the uh
stature estimates using genome wide association studies to the
extent that that will work uh to try to
investigate that. Um So I don't know what the
the going opinion on that is, but, you know,
certainly that's, that's the type of thing that is
entirely plausible that you could end up with uh
in that. Um, YOU know, if you are a
sedentary agriculturist who, agriculturist who lives in one area
for a long time and you're surrounded by quite
a few animals and quite a few other humans.
Um Just the, the disease burden uh is going
to be quite a bit higher and for a
lot of these diseases that we uh think about
causing problems for Children when they're young.
Yes. Uh So, uh I would like to ask
you also before we move on to the last
topic of our conversation, we've been talking about uh
different kinds of mechanisms that operate in the evolution
of uh trades complex traits and so on. But
what about evil Devo approaches? I mean, what do
we know about the role that developmental processes themselves
might play in shaping evolution? And by the way,
if they shape evolution in what ways does that
happen?
So, uh the ways in which a developmental processes
shape evolution has to do with the ways in
which they um the ways in which they allow
variation to be presented in a population. So, if
you think about long bones, um the bones of
your arms and legs and uh that sort of
thing where that grow in length because we have
growth plates and we know how growth plates work
through uh through developmental biology and a number of
other disciplines. And there are only so many ways
you can get a growth plate to speed up
its growth or slow down its growth. Um Those
are limited and those tend at least in most
mammals to say, be uh bilaterally symmetrical to one
degree or another. And, and that type of thing.
So if you uh depending on which mutations you
introduce into the population in, in which genes you
might end up with a situation where uh all
of your limbs grow more quickly, you end up
with longer limbs. Um um BUT in one circumstance,
you uh are dealing with how quickly cells replicate
in the growth plate as opposed to how big
they get or how rapidly they become hypertrophy that
is swell in size, which are two of the
phases that are involved in growing a growth plate.
All right. So what does this do? Um Well,
if, if things grow together, they can end up
being correlated with one another and correlated genetically like
we were talking about earlier. So development can structure
the ways in which organisms are prone to correlated
responses to natural selection. So, um two characteristics might
be highly correlated at one age and not so
correlated at another age. So, depending on where natural
selection is manifest in the life cycle, you could
end up with very independent evolution of the two
characteristics or a very tightly connected evolution of the
two characteristics. So, um Evo devo is very important
for understanding how variation gets produced in a population.
Now, there's, there's a in addition to sort of
figuring out why things are correlated, the way they
are and how they'll respond to, uh, random genetic
drift and natural selection. Um, ONE of the things
to think about is that the, the variation that
you see in a population today, um, is really
not the variation that got the population there over
the long term. All of that's been turned over
by mutation and drift and selection and so on
and so forth. Maybe there's been some gene flow
or hybridization that sprinkles a little bit in there.
It turns over and over and over again. And
um even though that happens pretty regularly, you end
up with a, you know, pretty much the same
critter through time. And so what that means is
that the uh um there, there's something robust about
development in the evolutionary context that needs to be
explained. Um And there, there is a, there are
a couple of uh uh there are a couple
of interesting biases because we typically only see organisms
by the time that uh we know, say a
mammal is pregnant or an egg has been laid
or so on and so forth. And there's a
lot of mortality that happens before that. So, um
lots and lots of conceptions conceptus is uh in
humans, just don't make it to the point where
anyone knows someone that's pregnant. So, uh there's quite
a lot of bias in terms of that. But
still, even if you take that into consideration where
we're not seeing all the really horrible mistakes that
the development makes. Um THERE is something robust about
it and it's robust to not just environmental differences,
it's also robust to genetic differences in some ways.
And so the ways in which variation can be
manifest is very important for understanding how longer term
evolution is going to take place. So if you
at what kind of variation do you need to
get from point A to point B in a
space of possible morphology.
So getting then into the last topic of our
conversation today, I would like to ask you about
a very interesting scientific American article from last year
that you wrote with Kara Obbo, who by the
way, I'm going to interview later this year as
well. So, and the title is to Understand Sex.
We need to ask the right questions and I
know that this article actually on social media and
elsewhere generated a lot of controversy. But before we
get into that, what was the main argument you
were making there? Because I get, I guess that
to avoid misconceptions here that probably lots of people
laugh about it. What in your own words, what
was the argument here?
So um uh to make sure that biology is
more than stamp collecting, you know, just a recitation
of facts, we have to think about how we
relate different things in the world, together, world, together
with theory. And this involves structuring questions and in
general, that's kind of how II, I go at
things. I, I like to assume that. Um, WELL,
I don't know what this is. I'm going to
research it. If I knew what it was, I
wouldn't be doing research, I'd just be, you know,
showing off how, how much I know. Um, AND
that's not, that's not my job, that's not my
point. My point is to figure interesting things out
and that includes questioning things that people kind of
take for granted. And so a lot of the
discussions around sex seem to be blending together a
whole bunch of different questions, a whole bunch of
different goals, a whole bunch of different types of
things that people want to explain. So the way
that, you know, I look at sex as someone
who studies genetics of complex traits is uh in,
in, in, in mammals, um in terms of the,
say the number of sexes. Well, the question I'm
asking is, uh how do these mice reproduce? How,
how does recombination work? It's very important when we're
dealing with the genetics of complex traits. Um HOW
uh you know, and, and a number of very,
very basic things. So for me, in that context,
two sexes, male and female probably work pretty well.
And that's sort of where my expertise ends. I'm
not much of a behavioral biologist. I don't do
anything in the way of reproductive ecology and so
on and so forth. Now there might be other
questions for which you might want to divide up
sex in a couple of different ways, you may
not want to divide up sex at all. Now,
that's beyond my expertise as, as a scientist. OK.
So for me, two is fine and for my
purposes of my question, no problem. Um So one
of the uh so when one of the funny
things is about the response was that people thought
I was, I was trashing the, the, the sex
binary. That's completely not the point that I was
making. In fact, I, I rely on it to
make a living. Um But in that context and
this uh the article sprung out of a bunch
of discussions that um Doctor Keach and I had
about um uh about how people are talking about
the spectrum, the spectrum of, of sex or many,
many, many different categories. And the problem with looking
at it in those ways is that say if
you have a spectrum um and it's along one
dimension, you still kind of have a binary, it's
polar, right? And is that doing what these people
wanted to do in, in the end? So the
people who argue for that and then if you
have a bunch of different categories, no, you don't
really have a spectrum. Mm So, um ultimately, when
it comes down to it, whether I think it's
a, a binary, so I really don't have to
worry about the mice that, that don't breed or
don't make it or, you know, mom gets hungry
after giving birth and eats one of them that
happens. Um, AND, uh, I don't need to concern
myself with that in my research. Uh, BUT, uh,
other people may have to and there is, there
are quite a few different questions out there. There
are quite a few different ways of going at
it. And, um, I'm inclined to see what happens
but I would like to see questions be uh
at, at the front and center and whether a
binary works in a given situation really depends on
what kinds of questions you're asking. No. So you
might say, well, OK, there's spectrum, there's a spectrum,
you're, you're really talking about gender when you should
be talking about sex. OK. That I don't know,
that's, that's beyond my expertise as a scientist, uh
any number of other applications like that. And I
think that there's a temptation the for scientists to
say that the science is established and therefore social
policy ought to be a certain thing. And I
don't think that that's what science is for. And
this is the second argument in the, in the
article um as a citizen of a country. Um
I'd, I have a, you know, I ought to
have a voice uh in, in political decision making
making. I, I certainly in favor of democracy and
I think everybody should have that have that opportunity.
Um But there's a difference between my opinion as
a citizen and my expertise, as a scientist and
um a lot of these decisions strike me as
not being all that scientific. A lot of them
have to do with the politics and the ethics
and the morality of the situation, which is well
beyond the purview of science, you know, if we're
talking about competition in sports, well, I mean, why
do we structure the competition in the way that
we do in the first place? Right. You know,
we think about fair competition um uh in the,
where do our notions of fairness come from? Why?
Why are we, you know, you know, is there
something some other way that we might be able
to do this that allows us to uh allows
us to have fun in certain ways or you
get the competitive bug out or, or, or whatever
we might do um that, that, that are rather
different, given the diversity of games that are out
there and the way that they are played, it
seems like there are um there are quite a
few options. So um I think that the uh
without the questions uh on one hand and without
a little bit of scientific humility and a recognition
that there's a larger political process that needs to
be respected and it's important. Um Then the, it,
it's very easy to get lost in a hashtag
war and, and pick sites.
So uh about all of you, all of what
you said there, I have three or four questions
that I want to ask you before we go.
So, first of all, um, are there questions that
would be left unanswered if we did not consider
how sex might vary across species? I mean, that
is, if we might not consider that perhaps I,
in certain species or in certain contexts, it would
be better for us to consider more than two
sexes, less than two sexes or any other variation
of them. Yeah. Well,
uh, there are, yeah, if you're just interested in
who has a big gamete and who has a
small gamete, you know, eggs and sperm or, or
whatnot. Um, YOU are missing out on just about
the entire reproductive system. Uh, AND you will, the
degree to which you can predict everything else about
the organism based on the gametes, uh, including how
sex determination works. Um, IS, uh, is, is kind
of limited in many ways and on top of
that, there are many organisms where there are, uh,
individuals who don't necessarily reproduce. Um, SO halo deployed,
uh, insects and that sort of thing. Typically you
talk about the males and then queens and then,
and then workers or something like that. And they're
usually described as sisters of, of the queen or
something like that. But they're really haploid or, uh,
you know, you end up with a situation where,
uh, no matter what you do, you have to
do a lot of explaining to explain the particulars
of the situation. And we can expect that in
biology, uh what it comes down to when it,
when it comes to sex, uh it really matters.
Uh YOU know, kind of which questions we're asking.
So, uh you know, our naked mole rats who,
who help out their, their, their mother, the queen
of the, of the uh the colony who um
suppresses the reproduction of all the other females and
so on and so forth. Uh, YOU know, how
does, how do we want to talk about sex
in that situation? Um I can see that there
being, I can see there being a lot of
complications and a lot of interesting things to talk
about. But I'd like to see it linked to
a theory linked to a question as opposed to
people just saying these are the facts because, you
know, if science has a, has a rough reputation
with facts, they tend to turn on science pretty
quickly. So,
yeah, and I was actually going to ask you
to, to what extent does the question, how many
sexes are there matter? Because I, I'm asking you
that because many times we hear and of course,
this is mostly politically motivated people that, but we
hear that if there isn't a set number of
sexes, usually they are referring to two sexes, then
it, it's basically anarchy, scientifically and so on. But
I, I mean, to, to what extent does answering
that question really matter or having a definite answer
to that question.
Um, WELL, I'm not sure. Um, IT mattered what
context I guess is what I'd ask in the,
in the sort of narrow explaining the world science
type of thing or.
Yes. Yes. In that, in that sense. Yeah.
Well, um, the, so if you're a, say, a
demographer or if you're breeding animals in a, in
a, uh, um, in an experimental context or something
like that, maybe uh it doesn't matter all that
much and two will do. OK, let's say that
you're a, you just are kind of interesting, interested
in how many individuals there are to reproduce and
that sort of thing. And the uh all you
need to know are sort of uh basic properties
of fertility and, and mortality in a population to
extrapolate what's gonna happen over the next couple of
generations. So, uh that's great. That doesn't really deal
with properties of individual organisms all that much if
you're interested in individual organisms and you're interested in
uh sexuality, the expression of sex. Um Then maybe
you don't want to tether it to gametes per
se. Uh And we can certainly see this uh
taking place in a number of different ways across
the animal world. Uh But I would say that
that uh whether clownfish change sex or whether there
are different male morphs that are either defend a
territory or sneak in on territory or mimic a
female or something like that. Um, THAT matters very,
very little for how we structure our society as
humans. Uh, I really don't think that we ought
to be looking to, uh, evolution and nature and
all that sort of thing for, for moral guidance,
we have to look, look to each other, uh,
in terms of scientific anarchy. Um, YEAH, that's a,
that's a bit of an overstatement. Um, uh, IN
the sense that science is science is ideally a
little bit anarchic. Um, IN that, you know, if
you're supposed to be able to ask questions, answer
them to the best of your ability and uh
change your mind if things don't look, if your
explanation doesn't look like it's working out terribly well.
And ideally that shouldn't be driven by appeals to
authority or appeals to tradition and that sort of
thing, of course they are. But, you know, um,
a little bit of, a little bit of free
willing thinking does not hurt science and it's certainly
not pseudoscience. So long as you're asking questions that
will allow you to say, well, I was totally
wrong on me to give up or, well, I
might be right about this but it's a little
bit over here doesn't seem to be working terribly
well and I need to readjust it. So, um,
that is, uh, that, that's the way that I'd
put it. And again, um, I'm a, I'm a
maybe a little bit vague here because this is
outside of my realm of expertise as a, as
a scientist for me, two is just fine for
most of my work. Um I'm not going to
dictate to other people what they ought to be
doing, but I do expect them to come to
me with a theory and uh and questions and
not just tell me that these are facts and
I need to shut up and go away.
And also, uh, I mean, of course, if I'm
saying something stupid here, please correct me. But also
when it comes to even definitions themselves, I mean,
in this case, we're talking about sex and would,
what would sex be or mean? But isn't it
the case that people can still be doing very
useful work and advancing science? Even if we, we
have evolved definitions or sometimes even definitions themselves change
as we uncover more about how things work. Like
for example, definition of gene, the definition of species.
And I guess that for sex it would be
the same. And even, uh, I mean, sometimes, even
without having any concrete definition at all, we can
still progress science, right? At least that's how I
look at the history of science when it comes
to understanding what the gene is, what the species
is. And I guess currently what the sex is.
Yeah,
the I I think that the definition of gene
and the definition of species are great examples, you
know, um, you know, the the definition of gene
seems to have wrapped back around to its original
definition. Uh, AFTER it went through, you know, it
used to be this factor on a chromosome and
then, um, or they didn't really know about chromosomes
then, or, you know how they were. Well, anyway,
they, uh, and the, then it sort of became
narrowly biochemical, then people realized, hm, this is not
working and then looks like all traits are complex
and it's kind of back to being a factor
again, right? So that's a, there's a cycle there
and species is a really interesting one. And, and
this is the one that, uh, Doctor Oak and
I did it used in the, in, in the
article, in the sense that um, species concepts are
useful in different situations. There isn't such a thing
as a identifiable species. If you want to start
a big fight amongst biologists, tell them to argue
about species concepts. It, it's a disaster. It's just
at each other's throats, you know, it's, it's crazy.
But if you take the biological species concept and
the nice thing about that is that, well, it's
not applicable to the vast majority of life. It
does come with a set of questions saying, OK,
um, identifying those individuals with whom you can meet
and produce a viable offspring or offspring that aren't
uh pedal by uh hybrid uh inability or, um,
and anything like that, um uh, you might need
to evolve a set of mechanisms that allow you
to discriminate on 11 level or another. And so
that comes packaged with a whole set of ideas,
a whole set of conceptual tools and theory to
structure your questions. And it may be that well,
these aren't biological species. Uh They may be two
species on either side of them or two groups
of organisms on either side of a mountain range.
Um Well, they, they breed a breed just fine,
but they never actually interbreed and they look really
different and that occasionally happens. And in that case,
you've answered a set of questions and you've generated
a number of other questions. Maybe you want to
talk about this in terms species, in terms of
lineages. Now, how did the actual pattern of mating
as opposed to the possible pattern of mating take
place? And then that comes with another set of
questions associated with it. And it's, this is, it's
important to say that um just to throw up
your hands and say that it's all very complex.
There's so much stuff out there. We need to
celebrate the complexity. OK. That's, but that's an aesthetic
choice or a rhetorical choice. It's not conducive to
develop, developing a theory that construct your questions.
Mhm So, uh since you mentioned earlier that uh
in your case, for example, the sex binary tends
to work quite well in the study of the
evolution of complex traits. Let me ask you just
one question. And I, again, I'm trying to avoid
the politics here. I don't want to get into
that. But many times I hear in on social
media podcasts and elsewhere, people claiming and I'm bringing
this claim to the table because it's a scientific
one that you define the way you define sex
is on the basis of a gamut size. Uh
But I mean, it might not be or perhaps
it's not reducible to just that. Right.
Yeah. And uh so again, this kind of gets
to the question of how you relate gamete side
to size to other things. Yeah. If you're just
looking at game size and isolation, congratulations. You've noticed
that one gamete is of a different size than
another. Yeah. Yeah. This does not make you Einstein.
Um It, it, what, what matters is the set
of connections you can make to other things out
there in the world. And a lot of times
I don't really see that happening uh in a,
in a careful way. I think that a lot
of talk of spectra is not doing the kind
of work that a lot of people think it
is on the other side. Certainly not all that
compatible with categories, many, many different categories of sex.
Uh It, it, there a lot of questions need
to be clarified and when those questions are clar
clarified, when you clarify how you're interested in things
relating to one another, then you can make progress.
But if you just, if you're just counting, that's,
that's not a particularly interesting scientific exercise.
So let me ask you just one last question
and of course, I've alluded to the fact that
you got different kinds of reactions to this article
on social media and elsewhere. But I mean, looking
at some of those reactions, what do you think
are perhaps the things that people got wrong the
most when it comes to interpreting what you were
saying in your article? And what, what are perhaps
some of the most interesting reactions you got to
it?
Yeah. Um, uh, uh, PILE of hate mail. That
was for sure.
I guess we all get a little bit of
that now. And
yeah, it's a really, really thick envelopes that you
gotta worry about. Um, uh, YEAH, the, um, uh,
there's a tendency among the, um, people who are
in favor of a sex binary and only sex
binary to claim that any sort of, um, questioning
of that is a, is a part of a,
uh, is a part of a elaborate scheme to
undermine western civilization and, and, you know,
it's, it's the woke mind virus,
right? The woke mind virus. And what's kind of
interesting is that, um, you know, uh, and as,
as you probably can tell, I'm much more sympathetic
to sex binary in a lot of situations, perhaps
a lot of other people would be. Uh, AND
that's because I, I use it and I can
show you how it works for those questions. Um
uh I thought that I'd get a little bit
of pushback for the, the part of the article
where I do, you know where? Uh OK. And
I do that, um I do say that the,
the, the binary might do in certain situations. Um
What I thought was interesting was the uh part
where we talk about how um as scientists, we
have a role in society. Uh, BUT that's secondary
to our role as citizens and that secondary role,
uh, uh, is an advisory one. YOU know, I
can have my opinions. I've got lots and lots
and lots of opinions. Uh, THEY, I, you know,
I don't think that I am expert enough in
everything in the world that I can offer an
expert opinion about everything and that I need to
be careful about that. So, uh, didn't really get
much response to that part of the, uh, the
article and that silence was kind of interesting saying
that, you know, uh, the science matters. But, uh,
it's, it's one of those things where it's a,
in a constant state of negotiation. And as you
pointed out, we, we seem to make progress even
though we regularly revise the most basic things, uh,
that we, that we, uh, that we think about
but, or the way we think about very basic
things and I, I thought that, uh, that would
get a little bit more attention and it would
seem to be completely ignored. Um, AND, uh, you
know, I, I, I'm not precisely sure why, uh
the, the, the statement about the binary being useful
was completely ignored by every side there. So, um,
but that's social media and, you know, that's, that's
more about uh laying claim to being on a,
a team. Um, AND, and that sort of thing
as opposed to Twitter is not a very good
place to, to figure things out in detailed argument.
But yeah, and um, you know, it was, um
it was fun to write and uh Doctor Keach
and I disagree on a lot of things and
um we, we, we agree on a number of
things and this was sort of a kind of
a uh a statement that we thought was, was
a fair summary of, of both of our opinions
on the matter and how they overlap and pointed
to a few places where in which they, uh
which they diverge. But, um then again, if you're
inclined to write massive uh physical hate mail and
send it to me at my work address, you're
probably not doing a whole lot of deep reading
and contemplation of it. But yeah, that's, it's a
hazard, you know, that, that I'm aware of. And
it's one that I one that I'm willing to
take. Right. So, uh apart from the article which
I'm, of course, leaving a link to in the
description of this interview? Where can people find you
and your work on the internet?
Um, I have a Google scholar profile. Uh I
have, I don't really have a professional website. Um,
uh, AND uh I do have a Twitter account
that I'm reasonably active on. Although most of my
more scientific uh interactions take place on blue sky
these days, but you can find me in both
of those
places. Ok, great. So I'm leaving it uh that
all in the description box of the interview and
doctor Roseman, thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
really a pleasure to talk with you.
Well, thank you very much. I appreciate it and
I uh I look forward to seeing more of
your interviews or uh you know, a real asset
on the internet. So I appreciate it.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B are no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall,
her ma J and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S
friends David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo
Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broder Douglas
Fry Franka Gil Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary FTDW
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams, the
Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica
Week in the B brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley
Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers is our web, Jim Frank
Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik
Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and
Rosie. Thank you for all.